
--- pagina 1 ---
 
NIKIMAT
   
   
   
   
   
   
Amel Super Maramu 2000
On NIKIMAT, SM2K #289 this is how we overhaul the Bow Thruster in November 2013.
We following information written by Gary Silver SM2K #335 Liahona and the notes added
by Bill Rouse S/V Bebe SM2K #387 and just took pictures to show the work.
For my ﬁrst time, it took 2 persons 4 half days
You know you will need the 3 neoprene seals from Amel (2 of 1 type, one of another).
Note: as of 2015, the 3 Neoprene foam seal 110x60 are of the same type.
3 bearing: 6006 JEM (Open Bearing)
Note: As of May 2016, 2 of the bearing are now closed (6006 2RS) and 1 is open (6006
JEM)
1 seal: 30 x 42 x 8
Note: as of May 2016 Amel suggest using a 29 x 42 x 8
1 seal: 60 x 80 x 12 (that goes inside the boat in the forward cabin).
O ring 78.00 x 3.00
O ring 40.00 x 2.50
Somehow on my list I have a bearing: 6204 2 RS JEM (but I think this is at the top for the
electric motor, never replaced it).
You can download the information:
Bow Thruster Service (.pdf).
Bow Thruster Service (.docx).
First removed all I could (mattress, etc.)
Added a double layer of protection
Marked the bow thruster
Attached a clamp with a rope
Rope to the cleat
Close up of the clamp with rope
Added a towel so that we would not loose any parts.
Removed the clamp
We had to use 90* plyers
Lower the unit, now it is only hold by the clamp (and rope)
Install Amel special tool and attach its rope to the cleat (note we attached to the other cleat the rope attached to the clamp)
Originally used some rescue tape to cover all holes and spaces, but it was too thick to go through, so used regular scotch tape
Removed the clamp, slowly lower the unit in the water, while on the other side Mike used a hook to grab the bbow thruster.
Regular scotch tape we end up using.
Put upside down the bow thruster to collect the oil, then clean bernicles
Different view of bow thruster upsidedown to collect the oil.

--- pagina 2 ---
Trying to properly balance the boat, I had placed lots of heavy weight forward, and noted I was (in my opinion) dangerous closed to the water (about an inch or 3 cm).
Removed the old seal (please note that I did not had the 2 retainer screws).
You can see with the new seal that there is little space arround the Amel special tool to put tape.
Unscrew the plastic bolts, then removing the pin that holds the hub
Remove the hub
Carefully screw 3 little screws
Improvised a tool to be able to pull the screws
Some weight at the end to pull through
Success, the seal is now removed!
We now locate at the bolt
Then unscrew them
Clean the top part
Gently tap on the hub
Which start to go out
And is gone
Pulling up the assembly
Here it is
Removing the old bearing

--- pagina 3 ---
Used a bearing puller to remove the other bearing.
note the coin on top, we end up putting 4 or 5 to protect as the plastic is very tender.
Hold tight the end of shaft of the bow thruster so it would not rotate
Unscrew the other end of the shaft
Remove the shaft
Put new besring
Gently tap in place with rubber hammer
To add new bearing to the assembly we used a PVC pipe on one side to hold.
And the old bearing on the other and gently tap
For the other bearing, we used another smaller PVC pipe
Since I did not had a press, I used my old car and a hydraulic lift (it required a lot of force to put the bearing in)
Then start to rebuild the unit
Close up of the bearing inside the bow thruster
Entering the shaft
Close up how it passes through the bearing
Then reattach the gear
With bolt
Then tight
Again by holding the other side of the shaft tight.
Then the bolts
Coke.
--- pagina 4 ---
Then put back the assembly
Here in place
Added some sealant
Back in place
Make sure the bold align
Some sealant as well
Putting enough
Put back the bolts
Add sealant to the seal on the other side
Use another PVC tube to gently press in place
Here it is
After totally rebalancing the boat, I now have 3 inches or 7 cm (instead of the 1 inch or 3 cm)
Add antofooling on the bow thruster unit
Carefull in some place
Put back hub and pin, then propeller with new plastic bolt
Here it is
Now we are going to install little retainer screw and washer, we put blue tape to only drill a little.

--- pagina 5 ---
We put the seal and foam seal through the Amel tool. Put some grease on the seal.
to send back the Amel special tool in the water, since it is made of wood and ﬂoat, I added a small scuba weight.
Put in place seal with sealant, the put in place the ﬁrst retainer screw and bolt
Then second one
Put the contact cement on the foam seal
Put in place
Add the 0.3 Liter of 90 weight oil
Add grease arround the shaft of the bow thruster
Then add the round spacer
Add the Amel special tool and scotch tape to cover all openings
Lower the Bow Thruster unit in the water and gently pull it up
In order to bolt it back, it was easier to lower a little the electric motor.
