595-305-E
080208
EMERGENCY  INNER  FORESTAYS
Headsail reefing gear has revolutionised the
sail handling on cruising yachts.   When
weather conditions deteriorate, and you need
good pointing ability, the shape of an all
purpose furling genoa can be poor. A change
down to a small jib requires the furling sail to
be unrolled before lowering - increasing the
chance of damage to the sail, and danger to the
foredeck crew. If the gear has suffered
mechanical failure at a critical moment, the
yacht may be left bare headed on a lee shore,
unable to claw off.
It has yet to be proven that any form of lashing,
beads or toggles allow a storm jib to be hoisted
over the rolled up genoa in storm conditions.
A common approach is to hoist the storm jib
"flying" - a dangerous occupation for the
foredeck crew as the sail is out of control until
fully tensioned.  A marginally better solution is
to set up a wire halyard as a temporary stay,
and hank the storm jib to it. These both rely on
an 'elastic" halyard, and standard masthead
sheaves. It is difficult to tension them
adequately for serious use.
Some propose a fixed or temporary storm stay
set somewhere between spreaders and 
masthead (see Fig.1 below). Any stay set in
this position must have some aft support,
usually in the form of adjustable or fixed
runners. Most cruising yachtsmen avoid
runners like the plague!
To avoid the requirement for runners, the The
The emergency stay must be positioned higher
than  93% of main forestay height. 
The seamanlike, structurally correct yet simple
solution is to have an emergency stay
connected close to the masthead (see Fig.2).
If fitted approximately 300mm below the
headbox, it should be clear of the furling
headsail gear and very well supported by the
backstay. It should also allow any halyard
routed through a lead eye to be used with the
headsail furling gear or a sail hoisted up the
emergency stay.
The emergency stay should be of the same
diameter, or one size less than the forestay.
For wire sizes up to 8mm, there are special
mast attachment plate/hooks which accepts an
eye terminal.  Above this  size,  the  mast
attachment is a normal shroud backing plate or
nose tang which accepts a matching wire
terminal. These fittings are compatible with
most mast types. For the lower stay end, there
are many options ranging from simple rigging
screws to excellent specialised units
incorporating a quick release connection,
rigging screw for pre-adjustment, and a
Highfield type lever for rapid tensioning.
The deck eye connection must be strong -
properly linked to a structural bulkhead, or a
reinforced deck area tied into the structure
below with a wire strop or linkplate.
Fig. 1 Fig. 2
595-305-E(R)
          980730
The illustration opposite shows the main masthead
layout features.
A Headsail reefing luffspar
B Sliding halyard swivel
C Side-by-side bullseye halyard leads  
 (up to 8mm dia., 2 x 508-135-01)
D Halyard for reefing foresail
E Inner forestay in operating position
Att. for 5mm dia.        ( 517-904-01)
An. for 6mm dia.        ( 517-905-01)
Att. for 7 & 8mm dia. ( 517-911-01)
F Spare foresail halyard for Storm jib
The two bullseye halyard leads are positioned to give a
minimum divergence of 10 degrees from the luffspar
axis. Either halyard can be used for the reefing sail or
any sail fitted to the inner forestay.
Care must be taken over the stay’s lower end
arrangement. It is essential that the deck attachment in
the operating position is strong enough for the task. O
f
equal importance, in terms of planning, is the stowage
method. The stay will spend most of it’s life stowed, so
it must be held clear of any rig item that could be
chafed. The best position is just clear ahead of the
spreaders, secured to the deck edge or coachroof side.
The stowage should incorporate some means o
f
tensioning the stay when stowed.
The popular options for stowage are:
a. Remove the special adjuster, and tension the stay’s
lower eye with a small tackle.
b. Have the stay + adjuster correct length for stowage,
and an additional short wire strop or Iinkplate at the
stemhead.
c. Have a rigging screw or adjuster permanently fitted to
the stay. When stowed, the stay will be bent through 90
degrees, and held in place by a lashing secured to the
wire above the rigging Screw adjuster
10 degrees minimum
Seasure Quick Release Lower
(for stays up to 8mm diameter)
Emergency Inner Forestay
Deck Layout
Light 4:1 Tackle
for stowage
Distance strop Seasure lever
(or similar)
Position of lower attachment depends on deck
/ bulkhead structure. The stay can be heavily
loaded, so attachment point must be strong